---
layout: page
title: <!--- Silent Killer--->
author: thomascorzo
---

The Egyptian Gazette has been one of the most respected and successful newspapers in Egypt for decades. Originally located in Alexandria Egypt, it has reported on multiple major stories and events throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. Given this history of the newspaper, it perplexed me to see the reporting of a deadly widespread plague to be minimal. Granted I only had a tiny section of the newspaper in the year 1905 but still I expected more on such a catastrophic disease. This curiosity presented itself to be the perfect serial question for me to explore. I wanted to know if the plague was reported on more thoroughly in any other issues during that year and how widespread the disease was. Was it just affecting Alexandria or was it also spreading throughout Egypt. To do this I queried the newspaper and researched outside sources.

Exploring the reporting of the plague wasn’t easy. I started off by just querying the word plague across all of the pages of the newspaper in the year 1905. What I got back was a broad result of articles with the word plague I them. In searching this I even found that there was a cattle plague going on at the same time. I came to the conclusion that the two did not intertwine and were separate affairs. Next I chose to query the headline “Bubonic Plague”. Most headlines are in all caps so I had to search that phrase in all caps since the query is case sensitive. That gave me a lot of useful results. It was then that I started to see a pattern about which the plague was reported on in the newspaper. The plague was usually reported on every other day or so. It was reported on in usually the local and general section and it was under bulletin records. The bulletin records showed how many cases had been reported to date and how many of those were fatal. The bulletin report also gave information as to where the plague was spreading. This was probably the most useful query in that it gave me the best raw data of deaths due to the plague. Another query I used was epidemic. This one was probably the least useful. The epidemic query brought up results related to the cattle plague that was unrelated. The disease affecting people was coined ‘plague’ and the disease affecting cattle was coined ‘epidemic’.

By using these methods of research I found a lot of evidence to help me reach a conclusion in my research. From the information in my newspaper the plague was already thriving at the start of 1905. In the prior year (1904) a total of 843 cases of the plague were reported, 501 of which were fatal. From the looks of these numbers it seems that the plague had been going on for quite some time. The plague was so catastrophic that American newspapers also reported about the plague in Egypt. In a New York newspaper they used the headline “Horrible affair in Egypt: bones and brains everywhere”. While that headline might have made a good horror movie title, the plague in Egypt was far from fiction. Monthly deaths were occurring at an alarming rate…….  This was occurring mostly in part because the plague was very contagious. I discovered in the newspaper that people started to get infected by the plague by the goods coming into the country mostly from India. Along with India, goods from Upper Egypt like beans were contaminated and being brought over into the area.

The methods I used were all digital methods which, while being very efficient, presented itself with some challenges. For example, using the microfilm and then OCR to convert the newspaper to text was a very efficient way of doing it versus typing it all out. The only issue was that I had no prior knowledge of how to use OCR which caused some headaches and made the process a little longer to complete. Looking back I am glad that it was difficult because I learned a lot from it and from the mistakes I made. Another issue was learning how to use the xml language and how to mark up a page. I came to find out that this is a very useful skill to have when trying to work and manipulate text and getting things on the internet. Again though I was very new to this process so it took a lot of trial and error before I was comfortable working with it.
