---
author: ErinWebster
title: Pan-Islamism Across the Globe
date: 2017-04-20
subheadline: "Erin Webster"
permalink: /analysis/2017/webster-analysis
header:
  image_fullwidth: front-page.jpg
---
They say history repeats itself, and, as much as we try to avoid repeating our mistakes, sometimes we don’t even realize we’re repeating anything. The world’s relationship with Islam is a hot topic of today, which many individuals may not realize was also a considerably hot topic over one hundred years ago across the globe. In my analysis of The Egyptian Gazette, I noticed Islam and Pan-Islamism were mentioned a great deal throughout the years of 1905 and 1906. More specifically, I noticed a lot about how different countries during that time perceived the Islamic religion and its followers.

In order to more easily locate the articles with mentions of Islam, I ran six XPath queries. Each XPath query was searched with a head containing the word “Islam”, each with different capitalizations – two with the word ‘ISLAM’ in all capital letters, two with the word ‘islam’ in all lower case letters, and two with the word ‘Islam’ with a capital I, and the rest lower case letters. I ran two of each to specify the type content – one with the type “item” and the other with the type “article”. The most results of mentions of Islam were found using the XPath containing the all capital letters for both searches, but even more with the type content “item”.

When I read each item mentioned in my results, I noticed a recurring theme throughout almost all of the articles – Pan-Islam. Varying greatly, depending majorly on the location, is how Islam is depicted in the writings in The Egyptian Gazette. One very common subject of the matter, is that in almost every article, whether the country was very pro Pan-Islam or not, there seemed to be a steady fraction of every population that disagreed with the majority. One country, however, had extremely positive views on Islam and their religion, and wanted to weld both parties into a single ‘brotherhood’. The Japanese sought only the optimistic qualities in the Moslems, and thought they could help direct Asia into the paths of peace and progress, and perhaps even of new conquests. In one article about Islam in Japan, an interviewer states that, “the Japanese are inclining to the belief that there is but one God; and the majority of the educated and heads of religions in Japan undoubtedly lean towards Islam.” When I read this statement, I can grasp that most of the people of Japan are converting to the teachings of Islam. The Japanese as a whole appear to be more open minded and accepting of change based on their discoveries, than are other countries. The writer from the aforementioned article was quick to defend his own religion (Christianity), in adding to the interviewee’s statement that they contrast with this statement, and that they have no reason to exchange their religion for any other creed.

The Christian Egyptian mentioned above seems to have a negative view towards Islam, which is not very unreasonable, considering almost every item published in The Egyptian Gazette has a negative connotation towards Islam and Pan-Islamism. One brave leader, Mustapha Pacha Kamel, had the desire to see all Moslems united in a political whole, openly supporting Pan-Islamism, but received countless open letters, ten of which were published, with angry responses about how the majority of the people are not okay with Pan-Islamism. However, though most of Egypt does not in any way seem supportive of Pan-Islamism, there are some people who are in strong support of the movement. Sheikh Mohamed Shakir, President of the Ulema Board of Alexandria, even wishes education to be based on the Moslem religion, stating that it guides the people along the right way. What appears to be most of the Egyptian population is very against Pan-Islamism, some even going as far as to publicly state that they are the clear enemies of Islam, and the states men should take steps to counteract the ‘evil’. Slatin Pasha, a leader of the Sudan, was very clearly anti Pan-Islam, and made a public announcement that no Moslem preachers were to be seen in the southern portion of the Sudan. Though each group may have a different outlook on Pan-Islamism, each view is particularly strong.

When England appears in The Egyptian Gazette, it seems to be very pro Pan-Islam. One article in particular talks about constructing a great mosque in London – which has more Moslem subjects than any other domain – that is to be worthy of the Capital of an Empire. However, in further reading of this specific article, I noticed that there must have recently been turmoil in the past relationships between England and Islam. For what I can only assume is the same reason for unrest in Egypt about Pan-Islam, recently occurred in England, resulting in a large population of the country currently trying to reverse the damage. The mosque is to not only be built by Moslems, but men of other religion as well. This cooperation is proposed to act as an opportunity for the Christian population to prove that the age of prejudice and bigotry are a thing of the past. I would like to suggest that even though London has the most Moslem subjects, that controversy regarding Pan-Islam is still very prominent in England. A writer for The Egyptian Gazette stated that the English press still continued to show a great fuss about Pan-Islam even a month after the age of prejudice had ‘ended’.

In 1906, India appeared to be influenced greatly by the Pan-Islamic movement. Nearly every one in five Indians were Islam, and one province in the North West was almost entirely Mohamedan, making the Hindus an ‘unimportant’ minority. Pan-Islamic propaganda was heavily pushed, and circulated throughout all of India, which I feel played a massive factor in determining the fate of India’s population. Every time an individual stepped out of their house, they were reminded of the benefits of a Pan-Islamic society. One writer of The Egyptian Gazette, a citizen of Egypt, made a comment about the heavily pushed propaganda in India, stating that a Pan-Islamic campaign may have very far-reaching effects for them, and their states-men should take energetic steps to counteract the ‘evil’. He even suggested that they wage an active campaign to oppose the Pan-Islamic campaign that the Sultan is carrying on against them in Egypt and in India. This was an Egyptian writer stating his concerns, which it should be stated that there are no negative comments about Pan-Islam coming from any Indians directly. India appears to have a very positive outlook about Pan-Islam and the Moslems, which seems to be a threat to many of the people against Pan-Islam around the world, especially in Egypt.

One country that stands out to me the most in discussing the portrayal of Pan-Islamism, is Africa. The reason Africa stands out so prominently to me is because of one particular African leader; this leader has no fear of the score of Islam, “even if it dominated the whole of Africa.” This specific leader openly is very supportive of Pan-Islam – a very controversial topic during this time – and many fellow Africans are seeming to agree with him. The missionary seal of Islam is at least equal to the number of Christian churches, however, Islam is infinitely more successful in Africa. Pan-Islam was growing to be a strong influence in Africa at this time; some even stated that it was ‘a force in Africa to-day such as has not been felt since the palmy days of the Caliphates.’ Generally, most of Africa seemed to be very supportive of the Pan-Islam movement; however, there were eventually going to be some negative stances on it, as well. I can tell from further reading of the articles written in The Egyptian Gazette, that most of the people who were against Pan-Islam were nervous that their own religion would become obsolete. Most people with these concerns stated that they believed that they could never persuade any people to be without discontent or discomfort under the rule of foreigners of another religion to their own. They stressed that no Christian would want to live under a non-Christian Government, and an equally strong prejudice existed in the world of Islam. These concerns were more openly talked about in articles based in North Africa and Egypt, but I feel that most parts of the population that were very against the Pan-Islamic movement in other locations faced very similar concerns.

France was one country that doesn’t seem to have a particular stance on the topic of Pan-Islam. The French articles I read appeared to be very realistic, rather than emotional, much like those located in Egypt. The pieces do state that Pan-Islamism awakens the idea of universal domination by a group of all the people of Islam, therefore could be a potential danger universal for all non-Moslem people; however, the French items are very clear in telling its readers not to pessimize the extreme, but instead look at the situation realistically. The French talk about the optimistic possibilities of valuable links between them and Islamic countries where they may have interests. In comparison to the much more emotional, negative items written by many of the people of Egypt, the items written by the French appear to be much more realistic.

Overall, it is clear that the Pan-Islamic movement was a popular topic around the globe. To my surprise, a large portion of the population, worldwide, was supportive of Pan-Islam and had larger interests in more positive relationships with Islam. The countries that did show concerns about Pan-Islam were worried that they could never persuade people to be content under the rule of foreigners of a different religion, and were concerned of the possibility of living under a government with a different religion. The Egyptian Gazette is a great source of information for analyzing a great number of countries’ relationships with Islam and the general population’s view on the Pan-Islamic movement.
